"borrow checker invariants" section of the (#2867)
google/comprehensive-rust: src/idiomatic/leveraging-the-type-system/borrow-checker-invariants/aliasing-xor-mutability.md

---
minutes: 15
---

# Mutually Exclusive References / "Aliasing XOR Mutability"

We can use the mutual exclusion of `&T` and `&mut T` references to prevent data
from being used before it is ready.

```rust,editable
pub struct QueryResult;
pub struct DatabaseConnection {/* fields omitted */}

impl DatabaseConnection {
    pub fn new() -> Self {
        Self {}
    }
    pub fn results(&self) -> &[QueryResult] {
        &[] // fake results
    }
}

pub struct Transaction<'a> {
    connection: &'a mut DatabaseConnection,
}

impl<'a> Transaction<'a> {
    pub fn new(connection: &'a mut DatabaseConnection) -> Self {
        Self { connection }
    }
    pub fn query(&mut self, _query: &str) {
        // Send the query over, but don't wait for results.
    }
    pub fn commit(self) {
        // Finish executing the transaction and retrieve the results.
    }
}

fn main() {
    let mut db = DatabaseConnection::new();

    // The transaction `tx` mutably borrows `db`.
    let mut tx = Transaction::new(&mut db);
    tx.query("SELECT * FROM users");

    // This won't compile because `db` is already mutably borrowed.
    // let results = db.results(); // ❌🔨

>     // The borrow of `db` ends when `tx` is consumed by `commit`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    // The borrow of `db` ends when `tx` is consumed by `commit()`.
```

pub struct DatabaseConnection {/* fields omitted */}

impl DatabaseConnection {
    pub fn new() -> Self {
        Self {}
    }
    pub fn results(&self) -> &[QueryResult] {
        &[] // fake results
    }
}

pub struct Transaction<'a> {
    connection: &'a mut DatabaseConnection,
}

impl<'a> Transaction<'a> {
    pub fn new(connection: &'a mut DatabaseConnection) -> Self {
        Self { connection }
    }
    pub fn query(&mut self, _query: &str) {
        // Send the query over, but don't wait for results.
    }
    pub fn commit(self) {
        // Finish executing the transaction and retrieve the results.
    }
}

fn main() {
    let mut db = DatabaseConnection::new();

    // The transaction `tx` mutably borrows `db`.
    let mut tx = Transaction::new(&mut db);
    tx.query("SELECT * FROM users");

    // This won't compile because `db` is already mutably borrowed.
    // let results = db.results(); // ❌🔨

    // The borrow of `db` ends when `tx` is consumed by `commit`.
    tx.commit();

    // Now it is possible to borrow `db` again.
    let results = db.results();
}
```

<details>

- Motivation: When working with a database API, a user might imagine that

>   transactions are being committed "as they go" and try to read results in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  queries are executed immediately and try to read results in
```

  between queries being added to the transaction. This fundamental misuse of the
  API could lead to confusion as to why nothing is happening.

  While an obvious misunderstanding, situations such as this can happen in
  practice.

  Ask: Has anyone misunderstood an API by not reading the docs for proper use?

  Expect: Examples of early-career or in-university mistakes and
  misunderstandings.

  As an API grows in size and user base, a smaller percentage may have "total"
  knowledge of the system the API represents.

- This example shows how we can use Aliasing XOR Mutability prevent this kind of
  misuse

  This might happen if the user is working under the false assumption that the
  queries being written to the transaction happen "immediately" rather than
  being queued up and performed together.

> - The constructor for the Transaction type takes a mutable reference to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The constructor for the `Transaction` type takes a mutable reference to the
```

>   database connection, which it holds onto that reference.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  database connection, and stores it in the returned `Transaction` value.
```

  The explicit lifetime here doesn't have to be intimidating, it just means
  "`Transaction` is outlived by the `DatabaseConnection` that was passed to it"
  in this case.

  The `mut` keyword in the type lets us determine that there is just one of

>   these references present per variable of type `DatabaseConnection`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The reference is mutable to completely lock out the `DatabaseConnection` from other usage, such as starting further transactions or reading the results.
```

- While a `Transaction` exists, we can't touch the `DatabaseConnection` variable
  that was created from it.

  Demonstrate: uncomment the `db.results()` line.

- This lifetime parameter for `Transaction` needs to come from somewhere, in
  this case it is derived from the lifetime of the owned `DatabaseConnection`
  from which an exclusive reference is being passed.

- As laid out in [generalizing ownership](generalizing-ownership.md) and
  [the opening slide for this section](../borrow-checker-invariants.md) we can
  look at the ways Mutable References and Shareable References interact to see

>   if they fit with the invariants we want to uphold for an API.

Reviewer: Unclear what this bullet is trying to say.

---
minutes: 0
---

# Aliasing XOR Mutability

We can use the mutual exclusion of `&T` and `&mut T` references for a single value to model some constraints.

```rust,editable
fn main() {
pub struct TransactionInterface(/* some kind of interior state */);

pub struct DatabaseConnection {
    transaction: TransactionInterface,
}

impl DatabaseConnection {
    pub fn new() -> Self { Self { transaction: TransactionInterface(/* again, pretend there's some interior state */) } }
    pub fn get_transaction(&self) -> &TransactionInterface { &self.transaction }
    pub fn commit(&mut self) {}
}

pub fn do_something_with_transaction(transaction: &TransactionInterface) {}

let mut db = DatabaseConnection::new();
let transaction = db.get_transaction();
do_something_with_transaction(transaction);
db.commit();
do_something_with_transaction(transaction); // 🛠️❌
}
```

<details>

> - This example shows how we can use the "Aliasing XOR Mutability" rule when it comes to shared and mutable references to model safe access to transactions for a database. This is a loose sketch of such a model, and rust database frameworks you use may not look anything like this in practice.

Reviewer 2: It might be useful to recall in layman's terms what "Aliasing XOR Mutability" implies, since a lot of folks may not be familiar with that precise terminology.

- As laid out in [generalizing ownership]("./generalizing-ownership.md") we can look at the ways Mutable References and Shareable References interact to see if they fit with the invariants we want to uphold for an API.

> - Here we want to be able to write to a transaction, which has some internal breaking of rust rules we don't concern ourselves with, before then committing that transaction.

Reviewer 2: > which has some internal breaking of rust rules we don't concern ourselves with

I don't follow what this means here 🤔

We can use the mutual exclusion of `&T` and `&mut T` references for a single
value to model some constraints.

```rust,editable,compile_fail
pub struct Transaction(/* some kind of interior state */);
pub struct QueryResult(String);

pub struct DatabaseConnection {
    transaction: Transaction,
    query_results: Vec<QueryResult>,
}

impl DatabaseConnection {
    pub fn new() -> Self {
        Self {
            transaction: Transaction(/* again, pretend there's some interior state */),
            query_results: vec![],
        }
    }
    pub fn get_transaction(&mut self) -> &mut Transaction {
        &mut self.transaction
    }
    pub fn results(&self) -> &[QueryResult] {
        &self.query_results
    }
    pub fn commit(&mut self) {
        println!("Transaction committed!")
    }
}

pub fn do_something_with_transaction(transaction: &mut Transaction) {}

fn main() {
    let mut db = DatabaseConnection::new();
    let mut transaction = db.get_transaction();
    do_something_with_transaction(transaction);
    let assumed_the_transactions_happened_immediately = db.results(); // ❌🔨
    do_something_with_transaction(transaction);

>     // Works, as the lifetime of "transaction" as a reference ended above.

Reviewer: Not done yet.
